there you go Joe thank you we're gonna be three and
you'll see about that in a minute but hi everybody I
'm really happy to be here with you my name is Joe
Jermuska I'm the chief nerd at night lab
which is the media technology and design studio at Northwestern University
just outside of Chicago in the United States night lab is a
we build tools for journalists and storytellers we do design
research we promote product thinking in journalism and of course we teach
students my professional background is actually more in internet software development than
journalism but I got into this field at the Chicago Tribune
I did a stint as a news applications developer there and
then I came to Northwestern to join a lab and I
'm super excited to be here I was super excited to see
a whole track about journalism why when we pitched this talk I
was like okay well we're gonna explain this to people and
now there's people all day have already been saying smarter things
that I'm gonna tell you today but anyway and oh by
the way I realized that I have had a cute or whatever
avatar and I've been noticing recognizing people at the conference from
there so I thought I should throw mine on there because it
's not me so that's me if it's familiar anyway
also I'm co-presenting with Ben Wardm
uller thank you so much Joe I'm so sorry I
can't be there in person it's for reasons right outside
of my control which is why I'm a disembod
ied voice right now coming to you like a Timu Matt
Barry my name's Ben Wardmuller I lead technology
at ProPublica a nonprofit newsroom in the US
that investigates abuses of trust and power in the public interest
I've also got a long history of building on and writing
about the open social web and I'm really excited to almost
be here with you all right now we'll hear more from
Ben later so but my I have the first part so I
mentioned one of the things we do at Knight Lab is design
research and over the last few years we've been involved in
a series of projects that we call Next Gen News we were
partnered with the Financial Times Strategies and were supported I need
to say by Google News Initiative thank them for this so the
idea was to understand the news and information behavior habits of younger
adults 18 to 25 especially seeing them as kind of the v
anguard of where things are going and hoping that if we can
characterize how they interact with information these days maybe publishers can start
to think better about how to meet them in the next few
years and sort of rearrange their process to be better serving the
needs of that audience so in 2023 we did about four dozen
one-on-one interviews in the United States Nigeria and
India and then last year we did another round of qualitative research
we did about 85 diary studies in those three countries plus we
added Brazil and the United Kingdom we also did a quantitative survey
1,000 people in each of those countries and the quantitative
survey went from 18 to actually 101 years old so we could
do some analysis that sort of compared across brackets and buckets and
so just some of the top line findings from that that frame
how we're thinking about this stuff and maybe might set up
thinking about how news has to change these are things that this
audience is probably familiar with but not all publishers are and still
just also being able to validate it say we actually went out
and found one of the huge things with this audience is a
continued sense of content overwhelm you know the world has gone
from finite content where you could start at the front page and
know when you flip the last page that you were done and
now we have an infinite stream we went from a situation where
news was defined pretty narrowly and basically defined by the publishers
to a world now where news could be anything there's so
many things that are vying for people's attention and so
publishers have to recognize the very different landscape that they're moving
into another thing that we think is really interesting is the way
that sort of quality markers and trust which we'll get to
on the next slide have kind of fallen away because now everything
kind of looks the same it's all on a screen it
's all in basically the same shape and so it's a
lot harder now for people to just know what exactly it is
that they're getting when they are consuming information and so that
also leads to a very strong you know over and over from
these dozens of young people we've talked to trust is understand
ably a big issue for them they have not been served well
by a lot of media institutions um they're concerned that news
is going to be false that it might be sensationalized that
it's biased it might be combinations of those and so what
they really want is a sense from the sources for their news
of credibility affinity and transparent intention just like a factoid that
maybe we can sort of verify probably fits everyone's assumptions but
we find that almost 76 percent of the youngest bracket of the
audience get their news from social media sometimes or often so this
is a question where people could answer as many as they wanted
to and uh but more than 50 percent of people up to
50 get uh often get news from social media so obviously this
is a huge change in consumption and a big place to be
conscious about where we're meeting audiences another thing that this audience
uh maybe less when we realize how many people who are familiar
with journalism are here but still a lot of people from the
at protocol world in the engineering world may just overestimate
what newsrooms are working where they underestimate the scope of the
problems you know the bottom fell out of advertising and journalism uh
really 20 years ago and it hasn't gotten any better consolidation
layoffs the threat of lawsuits are hitting all over the place
google search filler referrals to publishers dropped 33 percent globally in a
single year from 2024 to 2025.
ai overviews are at the top of almost 10 of u
.
s search results um when they those show up only about one
percent of users click through facebook referrals to news sites are down
like 80 percent since 2020 x referrals have dropped about 60 percent
small publishers have been hit the hardest social referrals for smaller outlets
dropped 98 percent over five years from 10.
1 million page views to under 187 000 and just four
years this is uh from the reuters institute uh reuters
does a lot of great research into the state of journalism from
their uh journalism technology trends of this year they found just in
four years uh there's a 22 percentage point drop in people
who were confident about the prospects for news um so people are
starting to realize that it is dire out there obviously economic sustainability
is a key issue as i said advertising is bottomed out
really only works at very large scale platforms take a huge cut
and of course the algorithmic wins shift you're in a
lot of trouble membership works for a business model for a lot
of organizations uh the guardian is one that's doing fairly well
with it but it does really require leaning into relationships developing that
developing that affinity that we talked about earlier cutting through the content
overwhelm and making sure that people value you enough to go
to the trouble to join um so there's promising signs but
it's a big question especially about how large organizations that will
build around a different economic model are going to adapt to this
world and then email newsletters were maybe going to be
the last way that you could really own your relationship with audience
but as ai starts creeping into people's inboxes the likelihood
that people are reading at depth uh is even less than ever
so that channel is also at risk so newsrooms most likely
to lose their audiences are the ones covering the most underserved
communities so ben lives in philadelphia as he observed the
inquirer could run city-wide ad campaigns and sort
of keep their uh face and you know keep themselves in people
's attention but smaller places like the kensington voice serving
underserved part of philadelphia can't do that so
independent voices while there's a lot more out there really have
a lot of platform dependency challenges and a lot of just sort
of cutting through the noise to get people's attention centralized platforms
or silos are unreliable partners at protocols for publishers in
london this february undra winensland
documented what she called a brief history of algorithmic fuckery
a timeline of every time platforms pulled the rug out from under
the communities they were supposedly supporting here's an example in 2015
facebook launched instant articles the new york times the washington
post buzzfeed and dozens of others invested heavily in a 2018
facebook announced a major algorithm change deprioritizing news and by
2023 instant articles were shut down entirely publishers who restructured their
operations around the product were left with nothing here's another uh
infamously if you mention the phrase pivot to video in
any newsroom people will physically shudder all of this
has happened before and all of this will happen again this repeats
because the incentives are baked in the platform's customer is the
advertiser publisher content is the bait when the platform no longer
needs that bait the publisher is stranded whoo well uh sorry
for the jump scare i guess so right now platform algorithms are
black boxes that prioritize business goals over audiences or society a small
number of powerful people like this guy with vested interests own the
major platforms journalists are being doxed news organizations are leaving
npr left x because of bad treatment for example in the
worst cases these platforms are culpable for genocides and
the undermining of democracy itself and these platforms don't just
control the reach they control the money too they can change the
terms whenever it suits them it's all in their control but
as everyone in this room knows all is not lost while links
are suppressed on many platforms and sharing them is impossible on others
forcing newsrooms to optimize for vanity metrics that don't help
their businesses or really inform anyone many newsrooms have found that
80 proto users are disproportionately engaged referral traffic click-through rates
donations from blue sky are all much higher than from legacy platforms
this audience already acts differently feeds on 80 proto are open infrastructure
anyone can build an algorithmic feed and users choose which to
subscribe to people have built custom feeds that surface journalism and ensure
real reporting reaches real readers publishers don't have to be passive
consumers subject to platform decisions they don't have to let technology
happen to them like an asteroid they can build and of course
the open social web is bigger than one protocol flipboard has
federated via activity pub since late 2023 with over a hundred
publishers like axios the verge semaphore smithson
ian fast company the 19th federating their content through it
a commercial company looked at the trajectory of centralized social media and
bet on open federation it's your identity your data your
relationships belong to you not a platform nobody can pull the rug
this is the future of media thanks ben um so of course
there's so much more we can build this is really what
this talk is about and that's why we're actually not
going to be i'm not going to be talking that much
more we really want to have a conversation our whole goal with
coming to atmosphere conf was to say there are some people in
the news industry who are recognizing that there is a lot that
needs to change and we want to think about it talk about
it and work with this community to build i'm especially lucky
working at northwestern that i can just sort of say i
should be spending my time on this initiative and if there's
things that we find that we can cooperate on to help make
happen that would be great so we came up with a few
sort of design provocations some things that maybe especially people who
are more on the engineering side and less familiar with journalism maybe
this will plant some seeds help you think a little bit about
the problems that journalism has that have not been in the front
of your mind and once we talk through a few of these
we can have questions now we can talk more later because what
we really want to do is solve problems so so one idea
is what if you could have like a membership card on your
pds you know it's uh old tradition that people who
are like members of public media at least you know in chic
ago for example you get your wbez card and then
maybe you get a discount at a restaurant or something like that
so what if we could take advantage of the sort of crypt
ographic trustability that a person is a member and the the
news organization can put a thing on their pds that says
so or otherwise wire things up maybe it would unlock different pay
wall treatment maybe this would be a way to bundle subscriptions a
lot of people talk about the risk of subscription fatigue and people
just not being comfortable making so many different financial arrangements so maybe
something like this card could give you privileged access to a partner
for a period of time your membership travels with you across the
protocol instead of being locked up in an app another huge question
how can we build more censorship resistant journalism you know in a
world where social is powered by open protocols platforms can't exactly
suppress the newsrooms reporting and they can't exactly turn off
the algorithm to fully bury a story just because it's inconvenient
but governments can attack a pds provider an individual application we
need platforms to be resilient so this matters right now of course
and it's only going to matter more in the near future
what are some things that we might do to help improve the
resilience against censorship for for media now for ben and what if
publishers and their allies could create and share algorithmic feeds designed
to service good journalism andre winensland's new specific
feeds on blue sky are a fantastic proof of concept and the
tools already exist graze lets anyone build and publish custom blue
sky feeds flipboard surf app also lets you build custom feeds
and it's a social browser that pulls together blue sky mast
odon and rss sources into curated feeds organized by content
type these tools are fantastic imagine newsrooms using them to release
their own vetted algorithmic feeds built from sources and topics
they trust operating over long-form content as well as short
posts readers subscribe to the feed and the newsroom's editorial
judgment becomes the discovery layer and then projects like standard.
site are doing fantastic work getting full article content into the protocol
layer so multiple apps and algorithms can surface it properly but how
do you let an algorithm read the article so that it can
recommend it while still preserving the publisher's right to get paid
for their work this is a problem we can work on together
and then let's talk about micro communities inside i
can read slide notes the bristol cable of reader owned local
newspaper in bristol built a new app with the newsmaster
foundation that combines news delivery with a full mastodon powered
community layer members get integrated stories and podcasts alongside a single news
apps news platforms and news websites the bristol cable a reader
owned local newspaper in bristol england built a new app
with the newsmaster foundation that combines news delivery with a full
mastodon powered community layer members get integrated stories and podcasts
alongside a social following section where they connect with cable staff and
each other plus curated topic-based channels because it's built
on the fediverse the community is interoperable members from
other newsrooms or anyone on the fediverse can participate through
their own apps a bristol cable member and a member of
another local newsroom can be in the same conversation the community
builds trust and the cable aims to double its membership by 2030
the community app is absolutely central to doing that i forgot that
i meant to go through and cash all the audio before sorry
about that anyway um so the gap between what open protocols can
do in theory and what a non-technical publisher can
use today is really the problem to solve and so um if
you're here for glenn's talk just before there's
interesting things happening in the oakland area about ways to apply
these things if you stick around for andrew's talk there
'll be even more about things we can do but it's
still too hard right now for a newsroom to set up
and run community on the open social web community management at scale
needs moderation tooling that really doesn't exist yet there's promising
signs but there's work to do publishers need analytics for community
health this is really important when you're trying to make a
big going business concern even if you're just trying to be
sustainable not rich you need to understand how your community's health
works and those metrics are different from traditional web analytics which are
also really important for these audiences so again our ask here is
for the at proto development community to work with publishers not just
building for them this is real there's real mutual interest between
the publishing and protocol communities and also gaps in the understanding publishers
often don't know what's technically possible protocol builders don't
always know what publishers really need so sustained collaboration is really where
both sides shape the project to get product together that's going
to be how this works so let's work together so that
's it for the slides now i would just love to hear
from folks either ideas you have questions you have about how journalism
works if you're less of an insider what can we make
together excellent thank you joe and thank
you ben wherever you may be all right ben was so sad
not to make it he was really so weird i'm happy
hopefully it wasn't too weird to have him disembod
ied glad to get it so i saw some hands yeah excellent
let's open up the floor for questions uh all right we
got one right back there um hi thank you um i you
mentioned uh community primitives in like a couple slides back i
'm wondering if uh newsrooms have any specific vision of what
an incredible community around their work looks like um oh yeah hi
i'm celine i work um on leaflet oh yeah
hi celine um i doubt that there are a lot of
newsrooms who have done that i don't recall being in
conversation with them about it there's definitely been um i think
more than just anecdotal evidence about the value of for example
uh journalists showing up in comment threads and participating there you know
comments the way they have traditionally worked on especially directly on news
sites tend to be pretty bad but there's a lot of
value to them showing up and engaging it helps to add credibility
and uh and again we're talking about the sort of sense
of affinity and belonging that we are we want to be a
member because you're our people we want to give you money
but i'm not sure those primitives are um if anyone
else wants to chime in on that we can hear or just
sort of noting that as a topic for future exploration um i
think one of the things that i think is and i've
heard this you know in other talks here uh it's a
balancing act because i don't think that most of the challenges
for journalism are technical i actually i came into this field at
a time this is you know in the early teens where everyone
was like oh the internet has destroyed the news industry so let
's get the computer people in here to fix things and i
said my backgrounds in software you know and um i'm glad
that i got in a lot of really cool people joined the
community but also it didn't take that long to realize that
that wasn't really the place to put and that's why
a lot of times i sort of um i don't know
if i'd say it but i really think about the problem
more as a design problem than a technology problem but it is
awesome that we have these technology building blocks coming up the short
answer is that's a good one i don't know thanks
for the talk joe i missed the beginning
uh so apologies if i asked you something you already touched on
how do you deal with the threat of ai what are some
of your thoughts on you know cloud flares paper crawl program
i know microsoft has a similar content marketplace for publishers would
be keen to get your perspectives on those yeah that's a
good question i think um you know there was one piece maybe
before you came in where we acknowledge that like uh instant ai
on google search is really uh hindering click-through this
is well understood um and you know there are people including like
friends of mine in the industry are like people are just going
to turn to chat or whatever and that's where they're
going to get their news they're not even going to go
to a page i'll say and i am known to be
a dyed in the wool idealist but i really think that
the human knowing the human factor is one of the secret weapons
here i think that one of the earlier sides that was at
the beginning is the desire that especially young audiences but really everyone
has is trust and a sense of affinity and so i think
that there's a lot of value to knowing where your news
is coming from and i also think i feel like i haven
't heard this that much and i don't have it perfectly
articulated but i feel like the problem with uh asking an ai
for your news is not that different from the problems with letting
an algorithmic feed direct your attention it's like well what
decisions have they made and how is that interfering with what you
're getting are you actually getting what you want and i think
uh because of just the mystery of ai it's going to
take the general public i think a little while to to really
see that as a risk but on the whole i guess i
would just say we have to lean into there is a market
for this and there's not you know one of the big
challenges is also uh you know i worked at a big news
organization i think our partners in this next-gen news research
are mostly thinking about big organizations that's not personally my stake
i am interested in anything that helps audiences and people who have
a thing that they want to say who want to make their
living being a person who makes information to have them connect with
less interference which is why i'm so excited about that protocol
um and i think so uh it may not be replacing the
biggest feeds there's going to be our biggest industry organizations um
there's always going to be a mass audience that chooses kind
of easy route and so on and i don't know that
we can do that but if we can make it sustainable enough
for the people who choose a different path to be able to
do their thing i think that's a win so in short
i think that there's the market for people instead of ai
and there's also lots of not just hand waving about how
ai might make it more efficient to do the work but ai
generated content i'm not long on personally um you mentioned community
engagement tools and um i'm asking because i used to work
on an open source commenting tool called coral that was adopted by
a lot of newsrooms where do you see the incentive for
publishers to adapt their existing tools to like the open protocols versus
adopting new tools that are getting created yeah i mean it's
a good question uh i coral has done great research thank you
for whatever part you played in that i mean i love i
knew a lot of people on that team and uh it was
private the sponsors of it don't really seem to have even
uh bought into it that much so the motivation is it's
a good question and i think this is another case where um
there may be a little bit of uh dinosaurs and small mammals
thing where we're in a phase change and some of the
big people who don't want to change don't and they
may not make it through um i think that especially when you
're a large organization you have to balance um so where was
this uh it's been a full day uh people were talking
about the washington post and uh and how hard it is
to get them to like try new things um and uh oh
yeah it was um laura and i forgot to mention so
we part of the next gen news research was interviewing news creators
uh including lauren sacks who was on stage in an
earlier session uh she works with local news international and they were
kind of the outshoot of washington post's briefly quite
lauded tick tock presence and then the post was like
we can't pay you all and they took the buyout
and they went and did their own thing and they're doing
great and they can experiment and they can switch um so if
the big guys can't switch i don't know um i
mean there's something to be said for making the case clear
you know for them to make changes but especially if you have
the experience you have at coral if you were unable to persuade
people that this is a better way you should follow it then
i'm not going to say that i know a better way
than that so you know there's a going to be there
's a lot of shaking out happening so you you talked about
kind of how we we design for getting readers to to trust
the news sources and um but it kind of seems like at
this particular moment in time one of the biggest threats is how
do you make news organizations resilient to somebody with just a shit
load of money coming in and saying i don't want you
to do it this way anymore which which seems to be more
of what's kind of hollowing out news in general you
mean uh like alden publishing buying the chicago tribune
shortly after well that was a little lie after i left but
yeah um or jeff bezos and the washington post
i mean i think that there's not much you can do
when people with money can buy things in my heart of hearts
enough people will know that that is a lesser product and i
mean the washington post bled hundreds of thousands of subscribers
when they decided not to do an endorsement in 2024 the
audience that expected them to be sort of adhered all these
old-fashioned news ideals saw that they were like oh we
can't put in the editorial up that is against the guy
who's probably going to win and if he wins he's
going to take it out on us if we did um and
i mean i canceled my subscription then and i'm again hundreds
of thousands of people did so i do think that that will
out again i'm a dyed in the wool optimist um
but i think that and i mean a lot of this buying
is happening at like the broadcast level i mean cbs news
is tanking it's like all over the headlines it does
it's not working um money is powerful they may be able
to do more than i wish they could uh but what i
really want to see is the people who have the ethos
that i believe in again be able to sustainably do the
work i take a lot of uh 404 media is one
of my favorite stories because they just do brilliant work and it
's like five people and they are making a go of it
and you know they they had i think their second anniversary recently
and they the story they tell is that they're they're
doing all right and there's been a lot of other ones
like that so i think that's more what i'm interested
in not only small but basically make it possible to do the
work without having to have the money already when you start